First Chiropractor Adjustment
First Chiropractic Exam Video
A chiropractor is a health care professional focused on the diagnosis and treatment of neuromuscular disorders, with an emphasis on treatment through manual adjustment and/or manipulation of the spine.
Most chiropractors seek to reduce pain and improve the functionality of patients as well as to educate them on how they can account for their own health via exercise, ergonomics and other therapies to treat back pain.
See How To Select The Best Chiropractor
Chiropractic is generally categorized as alternative medicine or complementary medicine.
Chiropractors: Fundamental Beliefs and Goals
Chiropractors focus on the intimate relationship between the nervous system and spine, and hold true the following beliefs:
Biomechanical and structural derangement of the spine can affect the nervous system
For many conditions, chiropractic treatment can restore the structural integrity of the spine, reduce pressure on the sensitive neurological tissue, and consequently improve the health of the individual.
Article continues below
The treatment concept of chiropractic is to re-establish normal spinal mobility, which in turn alleviates the irritation to the spinal nerve and/or re-establishes altered reflexes.17
In This Article:
Chiropractic Treatments for Lower Back Pain
What is a Chiropractor?
Chiropractic Examination
Chiropractic Diagnosis
Chiropractic Adjustment
Chiropractic Services Beyond Adjustments
Exercise and Chiropractic Therapy
Your First Chiropractic Adjustment: What To Expect Video
Conditions Treated
Chiropractors use a variety of non-surgical treatments to treat patients with certain types of:
Lower back pain and/or leg pain (sciatica)
Neck pain
Repetitive strains
Headaches
Article continues below
Sports injuries
Car accident injuries
Arthritic pain.
Potentially serious: tumor, infection, fracture, major neurological problem (cauda equina), local open wound or burn, prolonged bleeding (hemophilia), artificial joint implant problems, pacemaker problems, joint infection
See Cauda Equina Syndrome Symptoms
Nerve problem: when the nerve root in the low back is pinched or compressed, causing a radiculopathy (sciatica). Typical causes of nerve root pinching include a lumbar herniated disc, spondylolisthesis, spinal stenosis
Non-specific: mechanical back pain in the lumbar spine. This type of lower back pain is the most common presentation, and includes pain for which there is no identifiable cause.
Acute (symptoms lasting less than 6 weeks)
Subacute (symptoms lasting between 6 and 12 weeks)
Chronic (symptoms lasting for 12 weeks or more)
Recurrent/flare up (symptoms are similar to original symptoms and return sporadically or as result of exacerbating circumstances).
