A dermatologist is the medical expert you should consult if you have any significant problem with your skin. Dermatology is the science that is concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the skin, hair and nails.
The New Zealand Dermatological Society Incorporated's definition is comprehensive:
Dermatology involves but is not limited to study, research, and diagnosis of normal and disorders, diseases, cancers, cosmetic and ageing conditions of the skin, fat, hair, nails and oral and genital membranes, and the management of these by different investigations and therapies, including but not limited to dermatohistopathology, topical and systemic medications, dermatologic surgery and dermatologic cosmetic surgery, immunotherapy, phototherapy, laser therapy, radiotherapy and photodynamic therapy.
How many people get skin disease?
The skin is the largest and most visible organ of the body. It reflects the health of the body and acts as a barrier against injury and bacteria. Unfortunately, at one time or another, nearly everyone has some type of skin disease - infants, children, teenagers, adults and the elderly. One in six (15%) of all visits to the family doctor (GP) involves a skin problem.
What are the most common skin disorders?
Common skin diseases include
Skin cancer
Warts
Fungal infections
Dermatitis
Psoriasis - a skin disorder which affects 100,000 New Zealanders.
Acne affects every teenager to one degree or another.
Hand dermatitis, resulting from external contact with detergents and household chemicals, affects most women with young families.
One in six of all children develop atopic eczema
One in five persons suffers from cold sores (herpes simplex).
Trained dermatologists usually combine several activities – seeing patients in public hospital clinics and/or in private practices, acting as consultants to other specialists, teaching, and delving into clinical or basic research.
Dermatologists must have expertise in basic sciences including microbiology, pathology, biochemistry, physics, physiology, and endocrinology. They must be familiar with all the other medical specialities because of their consultant work and because skin diseases are often associated with internal conditions.
Dermatologists perform skin surgery in many situations:
To prevent or provide early control of disease, eg remove skin cancer.
To improve the skin's appearance by removing growths, discolourations, or damage caused by ageing, sunlight or disease.
To establish a definite diagnosis (biopsy).
Acne
Actinic Keratoses
Aging / Sun Damaged Skin
Alopecia Areata
Atopic Dermatitis / Eczema
Basal Cell Carcinoma
Calluses and Corns
Cellulitis
Cysts
Dry Skin
Fungal Infections of the Skin
General Skin Care
Hair Loss
Hives
Impetigo
Ingrown Hairs / Folliculitis
Keloid (Scars)
Keratosis Pilaris
Lentigo (Age Spots)
Lichen Planus
Lupus
Melanoma
Moles
Molluscum Contagiosum
Nail Health
Pityriasis Rosea
Poison Ivy
Psoriasis
Rashes
Rosacea
Scabies
Seborrheic Keratosis
Shingles (Herpes Zoster)
Skin Cancer
Skin Tags
Spider Veins
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Tattoo Removal
Vascular Birthmarks
Vitiligo (Skin Pigment Disorders)
Warts
Yeast Infection