A gynecologist is a medical doctor that specializes in women's reproductive systems. Separate doctors that specialize in treating women have existed for centuries, and these ancient specialists are the forefathers of today's gynecological doctors and researchers. Gynecologists are often at the forefront of debates over women's health and healthcare. While a general physician may be able to pinpoint and treat minor women's health issues, the expert opinions of gynecologists are absolutely necessary when it comes to certain aspects of women's health.
Cramps and questions about periods
Acne
Weight issues
Feeling depressed
Sexually transmitted diseases or STDs (also known as sexually transmitted infections or STIs)
Drinking, using drugs, or smoking
Help you understand your body and how to care for it
Give you and the doctor a sense of what is normal for you so you can notice any problem changes, like signs of a vaginal infection
Let the doctor find problems early so they can be treated
Explain what a normal vaginal discharge External link should look like and what could be a sign of a problem
Teach you how to protect yourself if you have sex
Your gynecologist can answer any questions you have about the many changes that may be happening to your body. It’s great to build a relationship with your gynecologist over the years so he or she understands your health and what matters to you.
A gynecologist performs a variety of tests and exams focused on women's health. Gynecologists are responsible for performing the standard yearly exam on adult women to ensure their reproductive health. During this exam, the doctor will physically examine the woman, perform a pap smear, perform STD tests, complete a breast exam, and monitor the woman's use of birth control. Gynecologists are also sometimes certified as obstetricians, and will monitor the health of the mother and the fetus during a pregnancy.
In addition to the above, a gynecologist must also monitor some of the same medical conditions in women as her general practitioner. For example, if a woman has diabetes, her gynecological specialist must inform her of how her disease is impacting her reproductive organs. Gynecologists also diagnose problems that women may be having with their reproductive organs, such as polycystic ovarian syndrome or cervical cancer. They may also check for vaginal infections and urinary tract infections in women complaining of lower abdominal pain or sexual pain. Gynecologists also perform minor surgeries on women's reproductive organs, such as tube tying.